At HDA we'd like to say thank you to Heritage Lottery for supporting us with the development
of this short series of podcasts which are about U-Town, Tiger Bay, Cardiff Docs. This
particular broadcast is just a short explanation, let's say, of Cardiff's Norwegian Church.
It was founded by Herman Lundt of Oslo in 1868. The wooden building originally stood
between the East and West docks on land donated by the Marquis of Bute. The gallery and the
bell tower were added in 1885. It is the oldest church built overseas by the Norwegian seamen's
mission to survive intact. Scandinavian seamen worked on ships which came to Cardiff. The
church, designed like a village church back home, was a haven in the bustling port where
the seamen could meet, worship, read periodicals from their native countries or write letters
home. After the decline of the coal trade the church was closed in 1974 and had a period where
it fell into decay. But in 1987 it was dismantled by the Norwegian Church Preservation Trust which
also kept many of the interior fittings. The trust raised 250,000 pounds in Wales and Norway
to re-erack the church on its present site where Prince Martha Louise of Norway opened it to the public in 1992.
And if anyone who's been there will know if you sit outside there and have a cup of coffee you get an excellent view of the pier head,
the Welsh assembly building and all of the new shops and bars and restaurants.
The trust's first president was the children's author Roald Dahl who was christened in the
church in 1916. His father Harold who worshipped at the church hailed from Oslo and had co-founded
the Addison and Dahl Ship Broken Company in Cardiff in 1880. The company also had offices
in Swansea, Port Talbot and Newport. Roald Dahl died in 1990. Every year his birthday
is celebrated at the church with a party for local children. The church is now a venue
for arts exhibitions and events and meetings of the Welsh-Norwegian society with the coffee
bar seeking to add a bit of Scandinavian cuisine. The church reopened in May 2011 after further
renovation funded by the Landfill Communities Funds and with assistance from Hoardland County
Council Norway. In the 19th century Cardiff of course was one of Britain's three major
ports along with London and Liverpool. The Norwegian merchant fleet at the time was the
third largest in the world and Cardiff became one of its major centres of operation which
clearly meant an awful lot of people from Norway and its surrounding nations came to
Cardiff. Sjomanskirken which is the Norwegian church abroad organisation which is part of
the Church of Norway followed in its footsteps. Under Carl Hermann Lund from Oslo the church
was built to serve the religious needs of Norwegian sailors and expatriates as I've said. It was
consecrated in December 1868. The church was clad in iron sheets originally on the instruction
of the harbour master to allow it to be moved if necessary. However the construction that form
meant it could also be extended many times. In 1883 a reading room was enlarged, in 1885 the gallery
and bell tower added and in 1894 the reading room was enlarged again and re-clad in wood. It was
known at that and until that point as the Norwegian iron church. It later became known as the Little
White Church and become a welcome home point for sailors. Between 1867 and 1915 the number of
visiting sailors to the church rose from 7,572 to 73,580 seamen per year. So when it was originally
built and in its prime it had a lot of public activity from the Nordic community settling in
Cardiff and making routes there to the Norwegian sailors using the place as a rest stop. It was
also became a home away from home for sailors during World War II as they weren't able to go
back to Norway due to Nazi occupation and increasingly the church hosted many important
family occasions such as weddings and christening. Now coal exports had been declining and post World
War II shipping trade had moved from Cardiff and in 1959 the mission's work was discontinued. In the
early 1960s the Norwegian seamen's mission withdrew its patronage from the little church
and the last seaman priest Per Conrad Hansen was withdrawn.
The residual congregation and other Lutheran organizations funded its continuing use by the
resident expatriate Norwegian community but it was closed and deconsecrated in 1974 as a church.
Because of Roald Dahl's contribution as the first president of the Norwegian church
and certainly his support in fundraising a room in the church is named the Dahl Gamera Gallery.
Thanks to the successful work of the Norwegian Church Preservation Trust
the church was moved, reconstructed and preserved and is still there and it's an excellent place
for events and coffee etc.
And here's an example once again of how you can preserve a building.
Sadly it also reminds us that no one bothered trying to preserve the homes of the people of Bute Town
but nonetheless the Norwegian church is a beautiful building.